---
date: 2013-09-18
title: New Blog (again)
aliases:
  - /blog/2013/09/18/new_blog.html
---

Once again, I have started a blog, and once again, the first post is to say
"This time will be different! I'm going to write, really!" I tend to start
blogs when I have a lot of other more important  things to be doing, and I
just started studying in earnest for doctoral exams; you can do the math for
that yourself. Partly as a result of studying for said exams, I'm often
thinking about things that I should write down, and here's where I'm going to
write them (here we see Michael justifying his newest procrastination
technique).

## About the blog

I used to write my website in PHP, because that's the only way I knew to
include extra content (headers, footers, etc.) in all of my HTML files (I
think this is a pretty common way people get into PHP, incidentally). I have
since decided that I [hate PHP](http://me.veekun.com/blog/2012/04/09/php-a-fractal-of-bad-design/),
despite the fact that most of my work at [CHMTL](//chmtl.indiana.edu) is in
PHP. After a brief stint with [Mojolicious](//mojolicio.us) (I do love Perl,
after all), I decided to rewrite the site using [Sinatra](//sinatrarb.com): I
like Ruby (Perl with a non-insane object system), and I don't need all the
complexity of Rails.

After spending a couple of hours hacking in Sinatra to get a blog working
without a database, I realized that someone had already done all of that hard
work, so I decided to use [Jekyll](//jekyllrb.com) instead. I hadn't planned
to have any real dynamic content on the site anyway, so something like a
static site generator will be fine for my purposes, I think. Besides, it's
what all the cool kids are doing these days, and I can host it for free on
Github Pages.

More real content later, but for now, a warning (with a hat tip to
[xkcd](//xkcd.com)): this blog will occasionally contain strong language
(which may be unsuitable for children), computer talk (which may be unsuitable
for musicians), jazz (which may be unsuitable for squares), and music theory
(which is definitely unsuitable for any reasonable person).
