---
title: SMT 2016
date: 2016-11-09T14:00:17-05:00
tags:
  - theory
  - travel
---

I was in Canada last week for the annual meeting of
the [Society for Music Theory](//societymusictheory.org) (as it turns out,
maybe I should have stayed...). It was, overall, a pretty good meeting: I saw
old friends, old teachers, and some good papers. More after the break.

<!--more-->

The conference was in Vancouver, and getting out to the West Coast is always
sort of a pain from here. I left the house Wednesday around 5:00 am, then flew
to Atlanta, then Toronto, and on to Vancouver. I landed there around 4:30 pm
(Pacific), and made my way by train through the rain to my hotel. From there,
it was directly on to the dinner and the Networking committee meeting. (During
which the Cubs won the World Series, and [Sean](//twitter.com/seanatki) made
the ominously prescient observation that they had roughly the same chances of
winning as Donald Trump.)

The conference proper started on Thursday afternoon, after a lazy morning
spent acclimating to Pacific time. I saw more papers than I anticipated: most
of them good. Here, for the record.

## Papers/Sessions I saw

Thursday:

- A special session: **Music Theory, African Rhythm, and the Politics of Data:
  Three Analyses of a Corpus of Jembe Drum Music from Mali**. I'm not
  particularly interested in music from Mali, but I do enjoy rhythm and meter.
  I caught Justin London's talk, "Statistical Learning and Rhythm--Meter
  Relationships in Jembe Drum Ensemble Music from Mali" and Rainer Polak's,
  "Non-Isochronous Beat Subdivision and Ensemble Synchronization in Jembe Drum
  Ensemble Music from Mali." Both were interesting, and London seems to be
  backing off of his previous work on non-isochronous meters (at least in this
  repertoire), which was interesting to hear.

- Two papers in the "Positional Listening/Positional Analysis" session, which
  was mostly good: John Covach's **A View from Guitar Land: Shifting
  Positional Listening in Complex Textures** and Kevin Holm-Hudson's
  **Stratified Keyboard Harmony in the Music of Todd Rundgren**.

- Daniel Thompson, **A Topical Exploration of the Jazz Messengers' 1963
  Recording "One by One"**. I heard a shorter version of this talk last year
  at Music Theory Southeast, but the longer version was good too. I'm always
  happy to have more people talking about jazz, especially if (like me),
  they're skeptical of Schenkerian analysis of it.

- James Hepokoski, **Shattering the Bonds of Nature: The Queen of the Night
  Invades Enemy Territory**. This paper was *very* similar to a paper my
  friend Paul Sherrill gave at SMT 2013, but other than that it was fine.

- Stephen Rodgers, **Schubert's Idyllic Periods.** This paper was one of my
  favorites, not least because it talked about some of my favorite passages in
  Schubert. Stephen sang along with Harald Krebs at the piano, but this
  session was marred by the sound bleed issues at the Sheraton: it was
  difficult to hear Schubert over (I think) Elliot Carter coming in from next door.


Friday:

- A special session, **SMT Goes to High School: The AP Music Theory Outreach
  Project**. If I'm being perfectly honest, I didn't actually *mean* to go to
  this session, but it was enlightening! I was only dimly aware of AP music
  theory, but this session was a good introduction to how the exam is written
  and graded, along with some nice videos from high-school students who are
  taking theory now.

- Rodney Garrison, **Schenker's Elucidations on Unfolding Compound Voices from
  *Der Tonwille* 6 (1923) to *Der freie Satz* (1935)**. This was a good
  overview of how Schenker treated unfolding throughout his career, though I
  was hoping for more analysis in the talk. (Side note: there seemed to be
  hardly any Schenker at all on the program this year.)

- The Jazz Interest Group meeting, where we had lightning talks:
    - Daniel Blake, “Space Is The Place”: Composition In New York City’s Improvised Music Scene
    - Garrett Michaelsen, Interactional Listening: Between Atomism and Holism
    - Clay Downham, Collective Improvisational Schemata in Lennie Tristano's Musical Community
    - Michael McClimon (that's me!), Harmonic Interaction in Stitt & Rollins's “The Eternal Triangle"
    - Paul Steinbeck, “Music is seen as well as heard”: Visible Interaction and Jazz Analysis

- Chris Stover, **Timeline Spaces: A Theory of Temporal Process in African
  Drum/Dance Music**. This was a nice paper, although I'm not 100% sure I
  understood it all.

- John McKay, **Formalizing the *Eroica*: The E Minor Theme and the Structure of
  Analytical Revolutions**. Also a nice paper, comparing historical approaches
  to the Eroica to Kuhn's *The Structure of Scientific Revolutions*.


Saturday:

- Jeremy Smith, **“I Know It’s Over”: Melodically-Established Keys and Tonal
  (Non-)Closure in Contemporary Popular Music**. I try to go to a few pop
  music papers every year, since I have a passing interest. This one was
  pretty good, and if nothing else, we got a bunch of Katie Perry songs on
  Saturday morning.

- Mary Ellen (Molly) Ryan, **“Our Enemies Are Gathered Together”: The Politics
  of Motets in the Newberry Partbooks**. The only AMS paper I went to, because
  Molly is a friend and we worked at [CHMTL](//chmtl.indiana.edu) together. I
  didn't understand every word of this paper, but it was well-presented
  (again, notwithstanding the sound bleed from next door).

- Rich Pellegrin, **Salience, Common Tones, and Middleground Dissonance in the
  Fourth Chorus of Brad Mehldau’s Improvisation on “All the Things You Are”**.
  Another jazz paper: Rich is a nice guy and presents well, though I disagree
  with most of his theoretical work.

- Scott Burnham's keynote talk, **Words and Music**, which was incredible. The
  topic was great, and he nailed the format.


I think that's all of them, though I may have missed one or two. Other
highlights of my conference mostly included seeing old friends and colleagues.
The conference hotel wasn't great, but I'll redirect you to my
friend
[Megan's post](//meganlavengood.com/2016/11/08/amssmt-2016-the-one-with-the-sound-bleed/) on
more generalities, including a Twitter roundup.

Sunday we left the hotel about 6:00 am, and I got home about 10:30 pm, before
beginning what has turned into one of the longest weeks in recent memory. But
more on that next time.
