---
title: Jazz Harmony, Transformations, and ii--V Space
aliases:
  - /ii-V/
  - /ii-V/index.html
  - /ii-V/abstract.html
  - /ii-V/examples.html
  - /ii-V/biblio.html
---

# Jazz Harmony, Transformations, and ii–V Space

Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Society for Music Theory,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin, November 2014

- [Handout](//files.mcclimon.org/projects/lcc-smt-handout.pdf)
- [Presentation slides](//files.mcclimon.org/projects/lcc-smt-slides.pdf)

## Abstract

Studies of jazz harmony in recent years have primarily taken the form of
Schenkerian analyses that seek to uncover large-scale voice-leading structures
to define tonality. Some theorists disagree on exactly how Schenkerian
techniques should be applied to jazz, but hardly anyone, however, seems to
doubt that Schenkerian techniques are the best way to examine jazz’s tonal
structures. While I am certainly not opposed to Schenkerian techniques, using
them as the only tool for jazz harmonic analysis misses some important aspects
of the music at hand. With a few notable exceptions (people like Bill Evans or
Brad Mehldau, for instance), jazz musicians conceive of the music
harmonically, rather than linearly. As a gentle corrective to this situation,
the present paper presents a transformational model that, while not totally
devoid of voice-leading considerations, shifts attention back to harmony as a
primary way of understanding jazz. While on the surface a transformational
model may seem just as abstract as Schenkerian analysis, harmony in jazz fits
in quite well with David Lewin‘s famous “transformational attitude.” A jazz
musician does not think of chords as series of Cartesian points, but rather as
a series of “characteristic gestures” between them. Tellingly, they do not
refer to a piece‘s harmonic structure as “the chords,” but rather as “the
changes.”

The most common harmonic progression in jazz is undoubtedly the
ii<sup>7</sup>–V<sup>7</sup>–I<sup>7</sup> progression (hereafter, ii–V–I, or
often, simply ii–V). It is the first progression taught in most jazz method
books, and the only small-scale progression to have an entire Aebersold
play-along volume dedicated to it. The progression is so prevalent that many
jazz musicians describe tunes in terms of their constituent ii–Vs; such a
musician might describe the bridge of “All the Things You Are” as being simply
“ii–V to G, ii–V to E, then V–I in F.” While some theorists are quick to
dismiss this kind of description for lacking rigor, in this paper I take the
way jazz musicians actually think about the music they play as a starting
point for developing a more rigorous transformational approach to jazz
harmony. This paper begins by outlining the basics of what I will call “ii–V
space,” compares this space with other models of jazz harmony along with other
transformational approaches, and finally two analyses to illustrate the
utility of ii–V space for jazz analysis.
